---
title: "Default RESTful Rendering"
author: "Ryan Daigle"
categories:
  - "what-s-new-in-edge-rails"
---
 
p(info). This feature is schedule for: Rails v3.0

A few days ago I wrote about the new "@respond_with@ functionality":http://ryandaigle.com/articles/2009/8/6/what-s-new-in-edge-rails-cleaner-restful-controllers-w-respond_with of Rails 3.  It's basically a clean way to specify the resource to send back in response to a RESTful request.  This works wonders for successful @:xml@ and @:json@ requests where the default response is to send back the integerized form of the resource, but still presents a lot of cruft when handling user-invoked @:html@ requests (i.e. 'navigational' requests) and requests where error handling is required.  For instance, consider your standard @create@ action:

<notextile>
{% highlight ruby %}
class UsersController < ApplicationController::Base

  respond_to :html, :xml, :json

  def create

    @user = User.new(params[:user])

    # Have to always override the html format to properly
    # handle the redirect
    if @user.save
      flash[:notice] = "User was created successfully."
      respond_with(@user, :status => :created, :location => @user) do |format|
        format.html { redirect_to @user }
      end

    # Have to send back the errors collection if they exist for xml, json and
    # redirect back to new for html.
    else
      respond_with(@user.errors, :status => :unprocessable_entity) do |format|
        format.html { render :action => :new }
      end
    end

  end
end
{% endhighlight %}
</notextile>

Even with the heavy lifting of @respond_with@ you can see that there's still a lot of plumbing left for you to do - plumbing that is mostly the same for all RESTful requests.  Well "José":http://blog.plataformatec.com.br/ and the Rails team have a solution to this and have "introduced controller responders":http://github.com/rails/rails/commit/aed135d3e261cbee153a35fcfbeb47e2e02b12e4.

h3. Controller Responders

Controller responders handle the chore of matching the HTTP request method and the resource format type to determine what type of response should be sent.  And since REST is so well-defined it's very easy to establish a default responder to handle the basics.

Here's what a controller utilizing responder support (now baked into @respond_with@) looks like:

<notextile>
{% highlight ruby %}
class UsersController < ApplicationController::Base

  respond_to :html, :xml, :json

  def index
    respond_with(@users = User.all)
  end

  def new
    respond_with(@user = User.new)
  end

  def create
    respond_with(@user = User.create(params[:user]))
  end

  def edit
    respond_with(@user = User.find(params[:id]))
  end

  def update
    @user = User.find(params[:id])
    @user.update_attributes(params[:user])
    respond_with(@user)
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}
</notextile>

The built-in responder performs the following logic for each action:

* If the @:html@ format was requested:
** If it was a @GET@ request, invoke @render@ (which will display the view template for the current action)
** If it was a @POST@ request and the resource has validation errors, @render@ @:new@ (so the user can fix their errors)
** If it was a @PUT@ request and the resource has validation errors, @render@ @:edit@ (so the user can fix their errors)
** Else, redirect to the resource location (i.e. @user_url@)
* If another format was requested, (i.e. @:xml@ or @:json@)
** If it was a @GET@ request, invoke the @:to_format@ method on the resource and send that back
** If the resource has validation errors, send back the errors in the requested format with the @:unprocessable_entity@ status code
** If it was a @POST@ request, invoke the @:to_format@ method on the resource and send that back with the @:created@ status and the @:location@ of the new created resource
** Else, send back the @:ok@ response with no body

Wading through this logic tree you can see that the default logic for each RESTful action is appropriately handled, letting your controller actions focus exclusively on resource retrieval and modification.  And with that cruft out of the way your controllers will start to look even more similar - I suspect we'll be seeing a solution for this coming around the bend shortly as well...?

So, just to recap the basics, here are a few action implementations side by side (the first being before responders and the latter being after):

<notextile>
{% highlight ruby %}
# Old
def index
  @users = User.all
  respond_to do |format|
    format.html
    format.xml { render :xml => @users }
    format.json { render :json => @users }
  end
end

# New
def index
  respond_with(@users = User.all)
end
{% endhighlight %}
</notextile>

<notextile>
{% highlight ruby %}
# Old
def create
  @user = User.new(params[:user])
  if @user.save
    flash[:notice] = "User successfully created"
    respond_to do |format|
      format.html { redirect_to @user }
      format.xml { render :xml => @user, :status => :created,
        :location => user_url(@user) }
      format.json { render :json => @users, :status => :created,
        :location => user_url(@user) }
    end
  else
    respond_to do |format|
      format.html { render :new }
      format.xml { render :xml => @user.errors, :status => :unprocessable_entity }
      format.json { render :json => @user.errors, :status => :unprocessable_entity }
    end
  end
end

# New
def create
  @user = User.new(params[:user])
  flash[:notice] = "User successfully created" if @user.save
  respond_with(@user)
end
{% endhighlight %}
</notextile>

Oh yeah, that's getting real lean.

h3. Overriding Default Behavior

If you need to override the default behavior of a particular format you can do so by passing a block to @respond_with@ (as I wrote about in the "original article":http://ryandaigle.com/articles/2009/8/6/what-s-new-in-edge-rails-cleaner-restful-controllers-w-respond_with):

<notextile>
{% highlight ruby %}
class UsersController < ApplicationController::Base

  respond_to :html, :xml, :json

  # Override html format since we want to redirect to the collections page
  # instead of the user page.
  def create
    @user = User.new(params[:user])
    flash[:notice] = "User successfully created" if @user.save
    respond_with(@user) do |format|
      format.html { redirect_to users_url }
    end
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}
</notextile>

h3. Nested Resources

It's quite common to operate on resources within a nested resource graph (though I prefer to go one level deep, at most).  For such cases you need to let @respond_with@ know of the object hierarchy (using the same parameters as "@polymorphic_url@":http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionController/PolymorphicRoutes.html#M000486):

<notextile>
{% highlight ruby %}
class UsersController < ApplicationController::Base

  respond_to :html, :xml, :json

  # In this case, users exist within a company
  def create
    @company = Company.find(params[:company_id])
    @user = @company.users.build(params[:user])
    flash[:notice] = "User successfully created" if @user.save

    # Ensure that the new user location is nested within @company,
    # for html format (/companies/1/users/2.html) as well as
    # resource formats (/companies/1/users/2)
    respond_with(@company, @user)
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}
</notextile>

If you have a singleton resource within your resource graph just use a symbol instead of an actual object instance.  So to get @/admin/users/1@ you would invoke @respond_with(:admin, @user)@.

h3. Custom Responders

While there's no facility to provide your own responder classes, it will no doubt be added shortly.  If you look at the "current responder class definition":http://github.com/rails/rails/blob/600a89f2082beadf4af9fe140a1a2ae56386cd49/actionpack/lib/action_controller/metal/responder.rb#L81, it's a very simple API essentially only requiring a @call@ method (more intuitively take a look at the "@:to_html@":http://github.com/rails/rails/blob/600a89f2082beadf4af9fe140a1a2ae56386cd49/actionpack/lib/action_controller/metal/responder.rb#L111 and "@:to_format@":hhttp://github.com/rails/rails/blob/600a89f2082beadf4af9fe140a1a2ae56386cd49/actionpack/lib/action_controller/metal/responder.rb#L125 methods).

Stay tuned here for further refinements to this very handy functionality - you're going to see a lot more tightening in the coming weeks.